---
audience: "students and professors in post-secondary institutions"
description: "The project aimed to research how post-secondary institutions purchase, approve, and distribute electronic software, with the goal of defining MVP feature requirements to streamline and automate aspects of this process."
duration: "12 weeks"
hero:
    caption: "University Approval Process Flow Diagram: This process flow diagram was created to visualize the insights gathered from a user interview."
    embed: true
    url: "https://whimsical.com/embed/BFN56x5yXFPpf929KthMnu"
thumbnail:
    url: "/design/university-purchasing-approval-flows/university-purchasing-approval-flows-thumbnail.jpg"
    alt: "Alternative text."
layout: "../../layouts/CaseStudyLayout.astro"
tags: ["Competitor Analysis", "Process Flow Diagram", "User Interviews"]
title: "University Purchasing Approval Flows"
year: "2020"
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->

## Description

The purpose of this project was to research the process used by post-secondary institutions to purchase, approve and distribute electronic software. The goal was to define the requirements for an MVP feature that would help to streamline and automate parts of this process.

## Project Role

I was the sole user experience designer working on this project alongside a member of our product management team. I was responsible for planning the user research, documenting our results and working with the product manager to analyse our findings.

## Process

We began the process by familiarizing ourselves with the current state of our application and did a competitive analysis of other products on the market.

We then defined what we wanted to learn and created a script for semi-structured qualitative interviews. We recruited people in IT operations roles at five of our client institutions and scheduled interviews. These interviews were approximately one-hour in length and took place over the course of two weeks. We shared the responsibility of moderating and taking notes between interviews.

Once we had gathered this information, I created process flow diagrams for each institution. We used these to identify common processes, gaps and pain points.

We used this analysis to draft requirements for an MVP. Our goal with this feature was to satisfy both the basic needs of these institutions and also help to address some key pain points as a way of demonstrating early value.

<figure>
    <blockquote class="blockquote">
        <p>[The university] is decentralized and wanted to support a population that wants to get licensing while giving BAs oversight control over budgets and approval.</p>
        <figcaption class="blockquote-footer">
            User Interview Participant
        </figcaption>
    </blockquote>
</figure>

## Challenges

Our user interviews covered a good sample of different use cases. However, this posed a challenge when refining our list of requirements for our MVP. For instance, for larger institutions, purchasers would benefit from having a list of approvers to search from and select on checkout as their approver was often someone who they had never met. For smaller institutions, this was not a pain point as purchases were likely to know their approvers by name. In the end, we prioritized functionality that would provide value to all of our institutions for our MVP and documented these nice-to-have features for a future release.

## Solution

Through our user interviews we learned that, for the purchaser, getting their software approved in a timely manner was crucial, especially for timed subscriptions. There could often be delays because much of the process was manual and relied on individuals to know to whom to send their requests. In light of this, the biggest value-add for our users were automated emails generated by the system to the purchaser, IT Operations department and approver. We proposed these emails to be sent both when the initial request was made and also to communicate status changes.

<figure class="figure">
    <div class="ratio ratio-4x3">
        <iframe style="border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);" src="https://www.figma.com/embed?embed_host=share&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.figma.com%2Fproto%2FoiJNeTeHIgGtsehlM30RaV%2FUniversity-Purchasing-Approval-Flows%3Fnode-id%3D1-2%26t%3DTVqCHclLcxUR00WO-1%26scaling%3Dcontain%26content-scaling%3Dfixed%26page-id%3D0%253A1" allowfullscreen></iframe>
    </div>
    <figcaption class="figure-caption">
        User Interview Template: Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 5 participants.
    </figcaption>
</figure>
